Update of §Intro through §Selective Disclosure Tech (#170)
WebOfTrustInfo/rwot11-the-hague: draft-documents/selective-correlation.md

# Selective Correllation

## Introduction

The goal of this paper is to enable decision makers, particularly non-technical ones, to gain a nuanced grasp of correlation. We will explore the concept of selective correlation, introduce a threat model, and propose a framework within which policies such as Data Minimization can be successfully actualized. We will strive to do so in plain English, but with some rigor. This will enable readers of this paper to better understand correlation best practices, to adopt correct approaches for their use cases, and to assess techniques that enable these best practices.

## Corellation and Identity

Correlation lies at the heart of identity. The concept of identity cannot exist without some obverver who identifies by correlating different data points about the subject being identified, whether the subject is a person, group, or thing. Thus Identity is correlation across contexts: the subject being identified is recognized as the same subject from a different context. Therefore, control of correlation is directly tied to control of identity, or rather, tied to control of how identifiable the subject is.[?]

> Correlation in and of itself isn't evil, or bad — it is a required function of any identity system. However, corellation historically also has been misused by adversaries to threaten or harm people.

Author: I think it is in the footnotes, just not linked here.

> To prevent that misuse of correlation, in the context of the self-sovereign identity principles[?], when correlation is used to identify people, the power to correlate must also be self-sovereign. That is, the power to correlate must be, as much as possible, in the hands of the person being correlated, as the relative risks to the individual is greater.[?]

Author: TODO: puzzle out who has choice in "to correlate".

It really should be about the user having the choice to allow themselves to be correlated, but what is the power of the other side?

## Selective Disclosure

"Selective Disclosure" is one of a number of privacy-enhancing techniques that goes beyond Data Minimization to protect against corellation. Selective Disclosure allows individuals or organizations to share only specific pieces of information, rather than sharing all of them, and prevents using corellation inappropriately to merge information from different contexts without consent. Selective Disclosure offers approaches to balance the need to share information for legitimate purposes to minimize risks, against the need to protect the privacy and security of people.    

GDPR does not mandate the use of selective disclosure, but the GDPR does gives individuals the right to control their personal information, the right to access, correct, and delete their personal information, and the right to object to certain processing activities. The California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) also allows individuals to know what personal information is being collected and shared, and to opt out of the sale of their personal information.

> In addition, some organizations have developed their own standards for selective disclosure, such as the Platform for Privacy Preferences (P3P) which provides a mechanism for websites to disclose their data collection and sharing practices, and for individuals to set their privacy preferences.

Reviewer: Such standards can help to remove power imbalances between organizations and individuals, allowing both sides of a relationship to express and negotiate their policies and terms for data sharing.

* Lack of user consent: By giving users more control over their personal information, selective disclosure allows organizations to obtain user consent for sharing their information in a more effective way. Users can choose what information they want to share and with whom, giving them the ability to have control over the information that the organization has access to. This can also increase trust and transparency between the organization and its users.

## Cryptographic Techniques for Selective Disclosure

Cryptographic selective disclosure leverages cryptography to allow individuals to selectively share specific pieces of their information while keeping the rest of their information private. It allows parties to prove certain attributes about themselves, without revealing their entire identity.

There are three important approaches to cryptographic selective disclosure: 

> * "Hash-based Elision (or Redaction)": A hash is cryptographic fingerprint of a set of data — it takes an input and creates a unique output. In Hash-based Elision, one party (the prover) presents to another party (the verifier) a hash of a piece of personal information (redacts it), without revealing the actual information. One advantage of using cryptographic hashes for selective disclosure is that they are relatively simple and efficient method for hiding personal information, don't require complex mathematical calculations, and it doesn't require a trusted third party. A disadvantage of using cryptographic hashes is that without multiple round-trips they do not provide any cryptographic guarantees that the prover knows the original data (they may be just passing the hash forward). Another disadvantage is that there is a corellation risk if the same hash is given to multiple parties, which requires techiques like salting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* "Hash-based Elision (or Redaction)": A hash is cryptographic fingerprint of a set of data — it takes an input and creates a unique output. In Hash-based Elision, one party (the prover) presents to another party (the verifier) a hash of a piece of personal information (redacts it), without revealing the actual information. One advantage of using cryptographic hashes for selective disclosure is that they are relatively simple and efficient method for hiding personal information, don't require complex mathematical calculations, and it doesn't require a trusted third party. A disadvantage of using cryptographic hashes is that without multiple round-trips they do not provide any cryptographic guarantees that the prover knows the original data (they may be just passing the hash forward). Another disadvantage is that there is a correlation risk if the same hash is given to multiple parties, which requires techiques like salting.
```

> * "Zero-Knowledge proof (ZKP): This cryptographic techique allows one party (the prover) to prove to another party (the verifier) that they possess certain information, without revealing the actual information. This is done by allowing the prover to demonstrate that they know the information, without revealing the actual data. ZKP can be used to prove a wide range of attributes like knowledge of a password, possession of a private key, and membership of a group, etc. As compared to a cryptograpahic hashes, ZKP is a method for proving knowledge of a piece of information without revealing the actual information, while cryptographic hashes are a way to hide the actual information, but not the knowledge of it. A disadvantage of ZKP is that it can be computationally expensive, or requires a large amount of communication between the prover and verifier, both can be a bottleneck in certain scenarios where low latency is a concern or on constrained hardware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* "Zero-Knowledge proof (ZKP): This cryptographic technique allows one party (the prover) to prove to another party (the verifier) that they possess certain information, without revealing the actual information. This is done by allowing the prover to demonstrate that they know the information, without revealing the actual data. ZKP can be used to prove a wide range of attributes like knowledge of a password, possession of a private key, and membership of a group, etc. As compared to cryptographic hashes, ZKP is a method for proving knowledge of a subset of information without revealing the actual information behind it, while cryptographic hashes are a way to hide part of the actual information, but not the knowledge of it. A disadvantage of ZKP is that it can be computationally expensive, or requires a large amount of communication between the prover and verifier, both can be a bottleneck in certain scenarios where low latency is a concern or on constrained hardware.
```

I don't think the explanation of the difference between cryptographic hashes and ZKP is very clear.. I tried to rephrase a bit.

Author: Part of the challenge here is that there are three large classes of zkp, one that uses ongoing requests to safely prove something (but has many rounds back and forth thus "phone home" problems, another that requires trusted setup first (i.e. some set of trusted parties do some pre-work, but once created doesn't require additional "phone home"). But there are some newer approaches that don't require a trusted setup at all, but are much more computationally expensive.

To be honest, I worry about how fast some zkp is being implemented. Using a hash tree has its limits, but it is well understood.

* Blind Signature: As the name implies, this is a technique in which a signature is "blinded" before it is signed, hiding the identity of the signer. This allows the signer to prove that they possess a certain attribute, such as being over 18 years old, without revealing their name or other personal information. The signature can then be "unblinded" to reveal the identity of the signer. This makes it useful in scenarios where it is important to prove that a document has been signed by a specific individual without revealing their identity. One disadvantage of blind signatures is that they rely on a trusted third party, which can be a bottleneck and a centralization or security risk.

There are other possible approaches to leverage cryptography for selective disclosure, but these are not as broadly being investigated today.

> * Secret Sharing: This technique allows a secret to be divided into specific number of shares, sent to to parties, from which a specific number of shares are required (a quorum) to reconstruct the secret. A disadvantage is that restoring original secret requires one party to be entrusted to restore the quorum.

Reviewer: Is this really a technique for Selective Disclosure?

Author: Some people think it can be used this way, mainly as more of a form of escrow. You can escrow shares (more typically a random symmetric secret that in encrypts larger data) with multiple parties, and only if they agree can the encrypted data be recovered. As Shamir appears to be totally random, it can't be correlated until a quorum of parties agree.

I only added it for completeness.

* Secure Multi-Party Computation (MPC): This technique allows multiple parties to jointly compute a function without revealing their inputs to each other. This solves the problems inherent to secret sharing, but at the cost of multiple rounds of interaction between the parties, and computational complexity.

> * Homomorphic encryption: This technique allows computations to be performed on ciphertext, resulting in the same plaintext output as if the computation was performed on the plaintext. This y allowing computations to be performed on encrypted data without decrypting it first or revealing the actual data. However, these techniques are extremely computationally expensive (by multiple orders of magnitude).

Reviewer: Some typo here in this sentence.

Author: "y allowing" needs fix.
